# ROSMonitoring

ROSMonitoring is a framework developed for verifying at runtime the messages exchanged in a ROS system.
The repository contains the Python implementation for integrating RML (Runtime Monitoring Language, https://rmlatdibris.github.io/) verification and ROS (https://www.ros.org/). Through instrumentation, it is generated a node monitor in ROS which is able to percept the messages exchanged by the other nodes. In the online application, upon each message reception, the monitor will send a corresponding Json message to a oracle, which has been implemented in this case through a Webserver Prolog attached to an RML specification. In the offline application, the monitor will simply generate a log file which can be easily analyzed later on (in this case always through Prolog and RML). ROSMonitoring is easily extendable anyway to new formalisms; it requires only an oracle Webserver using Websockets ready to receive Json messages generated by the ROS node monitor. In the current implementation, the Webserver is written in SWI-Prolog and, upon a message reception, queries an RML specification.

# Prerequisities

ROSMonitoring works only for ROS distributions >=Electric Emys (i.e. since rospy has been supported).

## Pip (https://pypi.org/project/pip/)
```bash
$ sudo apt install pip
```
Using pip we can then install the Python libraries we need.
```bash
$ pip install websocket_client
$ pip install rospy_message_converter
```
## Prolog (http://www.swi-prolog.org/build/PPA.html):
```bash
$ sudo apt-get install software-properties-common
$ sudo apt-add-repository ppa:swi-prolog/stable
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get install swi-prolog
```

## Java (https://openjdk.java.net/install/):
For instance, installing openjdk 11 would be:
```bash
$ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:openjdk-r/ppa
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get install openjdk-11-jdk
```

# How ROSMonitoring is organized

This repository contains two folders:
 - instrumentation
 - oracle

# Instrumentation

The instrumentation folder contains the generator program (Python). It can be used for instrumenting a ROS project (where the nodes are implemented in Python) and generating a monitor node for achieving the Runtime Verification of our ROS nodes.
This generator program takes a configuration file in input (the config.yaml contained in the same folder). Using this simple configuration file we can customize the instrumentation process.

The default config.yaml is:
```yaml
ROS:
 path: <path_to_ROS_project>
 topics: all
```
The 'path' item refers to the path to the ROS project we want to instrument.
The 'topics' is the list of topics we are interested in instrumenting (what the monitor will check at runtime).
The keyword 'all' is used instead of listing all the topics. Using 'all', we do not limit which topics will be
instrumented, and we instrument all the topics used in all the Python nodes contained in the ROS project.

# Oracle

The oracle folder contains two subfolders: prolog and rml

The Prolog folder contains the prolog files implementing the semantics of the specification language chosen: RML.
In this folder we can find the semantics of the Trace Expression formalism (the lower level calculus obtained compiling RML specifications). Beside the semantics, we have the implementation of a monitor in Prolog, both for Online and Offline RV. The Online RV is achieved through the use of Websockets; the monitor in Prolog consists in a Webserver listening on a chosen url and port. The ROS monitor generated through instrumentation will communicate the observed events at Runtime through this websocket connection. The Offline implementation is simpler, it simply consists in a Prolog implementation where a log file can be analysed offline (after the execution of the ROS system). Also in this case, the events checked by the monitor are obtained by the ROS monitor, which in the Offline scenario logs the observed events inside a log file. The same log file will be later analysed by the prolog monitor.

The other folder contains example of specifications using RML.

# How to use ROSMonitoring (through an example extracted by ROS Tutorial)

First things first..
Before going on we need a machine with ROS installed. It is not important which ROS distribution, as long as rospy is supported.

In the following we are going to use ROS Melodic with Catkin on Ubuntu 18.04, but as mentioned before, you can use any distribution starting from Electric Emys.

## Install ROS Melodic

http://wiki.ros.org/melodic/Installation

## Create a workspace for catkin

http://wiki.ros.org/catkin/Tutorials/create_a_workspace

## Create ROS package

http://wiki.ros.org/ROS/Tutorials/CreatingPackage

We need the 'beginner_tutorials' package, so do not forget to create it!

## Writing simple Publisher and Subscriber using rospy

http://wiki.ros.org/ROS/Tutorials/WritingPublisherSubscriber%28python%29

At the end of this tutorial you should have the talker and listener node working.
To run the example, follow the instructions at:

http://wiki.ros.org/ROS/Tutorials/ExaminingPublisherSubscriber

At the end of the tutorial, the talker and listener nodes should be able to communicate freely.

In order to simplify the monitoring process and make it easier, we need to change a small thing inside talker.py.

Line 47 must become:
```python
...
hello_str = "hello"
...
```

Now we are ready to start monitoring our talker and listener nodes!

## Clone the ROSMonitoring repository

We need the ROSMonitoring implementation in order to instrument and verify our nodes. So, now is the time to clone the repository, if you have not already.

In the terminal:
```bash
 $ roscd beginner_tutorials/
 $ git clone https://github.com/autonomy-and-verification-uol/ROSMonitoring.git
```
Now you should have your local ROSMonitoring folder.

### Instrument talker and listener nodes

The first thing to do in order to monitor our nodes is to instrument them. Thanks to this step, our monitor will be able to intercept the topics of our interest (even though for now we have only the 'chatter' topic).

 $ cd ROSMonitoring/instrumentation/

Inside this folder you should find: config.yaml, generator, and generator.py.
The Python program we are going to execute is generator. But, before doing that, we need to change the configuration file, config.yaml. This configuration file allows us to select which ROS project we want to instrument, and which topics we are interested in ('all' is the keyword for considering all the topics used by the nodes). If we are interested in checking only a subset of the topics used by our nodes, following the syntax of YAML, we can list all the topics one by one instead.
We need to change <path_to_ROS_project> into ~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials
We can leave the topics list as it is. Note that in this case we could remove the keyword all, and add chatter, without changing the final outcome.

The new config.yaml file should look like this:
```yaml
#config file for the instrumentation of ROS
#this file is given in input to generator.py

ROS:
  path: ~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials/scripts/
  topics: all
```

Now we are ready to execute the generator.

$ chmod +x generator
$ ./generator
$ ./generator
{'path': '~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials/scripts/', 'topics': 'all'}
('chatter', ('String', 'from std_msgs.msg import String'), 'queue_size=10')

If we go back to the parent folder, we should now find a new folder called ROSMonitor. Inside this folder, two new files have been automatically generated: monitor.py and monitor.yaml
 - monitor.py is the Python definition of the monitor for ROS; its objective is to intercept the topics and log them (for Offline RV) or propagate them to the oracle (Webserver Prolog in this case).
 - monitor.yaml is the configuration file for the monitor node.

Before going on, let us have a look at monitor.yaml
```yaml
monitor: # offline RV
 log: ./log.txt # file where the monitor will log the observed events
 when: offline # when the RV will be applied

# monitor: # online RV
#   action: log # default action (optional) # the other possible value is: filter
#   log: ./log.txt # file where the monitor will log the observed events
#   oracle: # the oracle running and ready to check the specification
#     port: 8080 # the port where it is listening
#     url: 127.0.0.1 # the url where it is listening
#   when: online # when the RV will be applied
```

The default configuration file for the monitor is set for Offline RV. In the commented part we have a possible use for the Online version. The YAML syntax is very intuitive, focusing for now on the Offline parameters, we can set where the events observed by the monitor will be saved (default here is log.txt), and at which time the RV will be applied (in this case Offline, setting the corresponding 'when' item).

The generator has not created the ROSMonitor folder, but it has also instrumented our nodes.
Let us have a look inside the scripts folder.
```bash
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials/scripts/
$ ls
listener_instrumented.py  listener.py  talker_instrumented.py  talker.py
```
As we can see, now we have two new files: talker_instrumented.py and listener_instrumented.py

These two instrumented files are equal to the previous ones. The only difference is in the substitution of the topics which are published by talker. If we compare talker.py with talker_instrumented.py, we find a small difference.

In talker.py we have:
```python
...
pub = rospy.Publisher('chatter', String, queue_size=10)
...
```
While in talker_instrumented.py we have:
```python
...
pub = rospy.Publisher('chatter_mon', String, queue_size=10)
...
```

Even though this can seem as a worthless modification, it allows us to put a monitor in the middle of the communication.
In fact, the instrumented talker publishes on a different topic now ('chatter_mon'), while the listener (which in this specific case is totally unchanged since it does not publish anything) listens on the old one ('chatter'). If we run the two instrumented nodes as we did before with the normal ones, we would observe that the two nodes are not able to communicate anymore. Because the talker publishes a topic that is not subscribed by the listener.

Remember: roscore must be running on another terminal..
```bash
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials/scripts/
$ chmod +x talker_instrumented.py
$ chmod +x listener_instrumented.py
```
In a terminal then
```bash
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/
$ rosrun beginner_tutorials talker_instrumented.py
```
and in a different one
```bash
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/
$ rosrun beginner_tutorials listener_instrumented.py
```
The talker should print the topics on the terminal as before. But, the listener should print nothing.

### Adding the monitor in the middle (Offline version).

In order to re-establish the communication between our nodes, we have to execute the monitor which has been created by the generator program.

On a different terminal:
```bash
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials/ROSMonitoring/ROSMonitor/
$ chmod +x monitor.py
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/
$ rosrun beginner_tutorials monitor.py
[INFO] [1559652181.670203]: monitor started and ready: Offline
```

The monitor is now ready to intercept the messages.

Let us execute again the instrumented nodes (talker_instrumented.py and listener_instrumented.py) as we did before.
This time they will be able to communicate.

The monitor should print on the terminal something like this:
```bash
[INFO] [1559638171.740409]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard hello
[INFO] [1559638171.840524]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard hello
[INFO] [1559638171.941144]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard hello
[INFO] [1559638172.040488]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard hello
```

Since we have selected Offline RV, the monitor is only logging the events.
We can find the automatically generated log file (log.txt) inside ~/catkin_ws folder.

The log file should look like this:
```json
{"topic": "chatter", "data": "hello", "time": 1559638159.43485}
{"topic": "chatter", "data": "hello", "time": 1559638159.534461}
{"topic": "chatter", "data": "hello", "time": 1559638159.635648}
...
```

The last step for the Offline version is to check the log file against a formal specification.
To do this, first we copy the log file into the prolog folder, and then we run the monitor (using the already given sh file).
```bash
$ cp ~/catkin_ws/log.txt ~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials/ROSMonitoring/oracle/
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials/ROSMonitoring/oracle/prolog/
$ sh offline_monitor.sh ../rml/test.pl ../log.txt
...
matched event #89
matched event #90
matched event #91
matched event #92
Execution terminated correctly
```

offline_monitor.sh expects two arguments:
 - the specification we want to verify (test.pl in this example)
 - the log file containing the traces generated by the ROS monitor (log.txt in this case)

The test.pl is the lower level representation of test.rml (contained in the same folder). If we want to verify new properties, we only need to write them followin the RML syntax (creating a corresponding .rml file). And then, we can compile the new rml specifications using the rml-compiler.jar (also contained in the rml folder).

For instance, to generate test.pl, we can do as follows:
```bash
$ cd ~/catkin-ws/src/beginner_tutorials/ROSMonitoring/oracle/rml/
$ java -jar rml-compiler.jar --input test.rml --output test.pl
```
The compiler will automatically compile the rml file into the equivalent prolog one, which can be used directly from the Prolog monitor.
More information about RML can be found at: https://rmlatdibris.github.io/

### Adding the monitor in the middle (Online version).

Before we used our monitor only for logging purposes. But, the real power of our monitor lies in being the bridge among ROS nodes communications.
Instead of generating only a log file, we can check the events generated inside ROS dynamically.

In order to execute the Online version, we need to do two things first.

We have to update the monitor.yaml configuration file, and we have to run the Webserver Prolog (our oracle) in order to check the specification against the events observed by monitor.py.

The modification of monitor.yaml can be done very easily, just swapping the comments.
```yaml
# monitor: # offline RV
#  log: ./log.txt # file where the monitor will log the observed events
#  when: offline # when the RV will be applied

monitor: # online RV
   action: log # default action (optional) # the other possible value is: filter
   log: ./log.txt # file where the monitor will log the observed events
   oracle: # the oracle running and ready to check the specification
     port: 8080 # the port where it is listening
     url: 127.0.0.1 # the url where it is listening
   when: online # when the RV will be applied
```
As for the Offline case, also here we have different parameters for customize the RV process. More specifically, we need to inform the ROS monitor about the oracle (Webserver Prolog here). So, we have to specify where it will be listening (url) and on which port (8080). A new parameter available only for the Online version is 'action'. Thanks to this argument, we can choose what the monitor can do when an error is observed (i.e. an event inconsistent with our specification). The possible values for now are: log and filter.
 - log, the monitor logs everything (also the errors)
 - filter, the monitor propagates only the events which are consistent with the specification

If we try to run our monitor again as before, it will raise an error.
```bash
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/
$ rosrun beginner_tutorials monitor.py
[INFO] [1559657476.706400]: monitor started and ready: Online
[INFO] [1559657476.707265]: [Errno 111] Connection refused
[INFO] [1559657476.707966]: ### websocket closed ###
```
The error is caused by the absence of an oracle ready on 127.0.0.1:8080.

Thus, before running our Online monitor, we need to execute the Webserver Prolog, as possible implementation of our oracle.
```bash
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials/ROSMonitoring/oracle/prolog/
$ sh online_monitor.sh ../rml/test.pl
% Started server at http://127.0.0.1:8080/
Welcome to SWI-Prolog (threaded, 64 bits, version 8.0.2)
SWI-Prolog comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY. This is free software.
Please run ?- license. for legal details.

For online help and background, visit http://www.swi-prolog.org
For built-in help, use ?- help(Topic). or ?- apropos(Word).

?-
```
The Webserver is now ready and running.

The execution of the monitor is the same as for the Offline case, but we can see that each time the ROS monitor observes an event, instead of logging it, it first sends it to the Webserver Prolog in order to check the event against the RML specification.
Also in the terminal where we are executing monitor.py we can notice different log information with respect to the Offline version.
```bash
$ rosrun beginner_tutorials monitor.py
...
[INFO] [1559658087.038097]: monitor has observed: hello
[INFO] [1559658087.136548]: event propagated to oracle
The event {"data":"hello", "topic":"chatter"} is consistent and republished
...
```
In the piece of output showed above we can see how the monitor, first intercepts an event, then it propagates the event to the oracle, and finally upon the reception from the oracle saying the event is consistent, it logs this information.

### Using the filter action

The last part of this tutorial will show the use of the monitor for filtering the wrong events.

The specification file test.rml (and its compilation test.pl) are already prepared for being used in a slightly more complex example.

In order to filter wrong events, we need nodes generating wrong events first.

Let us change the talker.py file in the following way:
```python
import rospy
from std_msgs.msg import String
from std_msgs.msg import Int32

def talker():
    pub = rospy.Publisher('chatter', String, queue_size=10)
    pub_c = rospy.Publisher('count', Int32, queue_size=10)
    rospy.init_node('talker', anonymous=True)
    rate = rospy.Rate(10) # 10hz
    count = 0
    while not rospy.is_shutdown():
        hello_str = "hello"# %s" % rospy.get_time()
        rospy.loginfo(hello_str)
        pub.publish(hello_str)
        rospy.loginfo('count ' + str(count))
        pub_c.publish(count)
        count += 1
        rate.sleep()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    try:
        talker()
    except rospy.ROSInterruptException:
        pass
```
With respect to the previous version, now the talker node publishes also a counter.

And of course, also the listener must change in order to care about the new topic.
```python
import rospy
from std_msgs.msg import String
from std_msgs.msg import Int32

def callback(data):
    rospy.loginfo(rospy.get_caller_id() + 'I heard %s', data.data)

def callback_c(data):
    rospy.loginfo(rospy.get_caller_id() + 'I heard count %s', str(data.data))

def listener():

    # In ROS, nodes are uniquely named. If two nodes with the same
    # name are launched, the previous one is kicked off. The
    # anonymous=True flag means that rospy will choose a unique
    # name for our 'listener' node so that multiple listeners can
    # run simultaneously.
    rospy.init_node('listener', anonymous=True)

    rospy.Subscriber('chatter', String, callback)

    rospy.Subscriber('count', Int32, callback_c)

    # spin() simply keeps python from exiting until this node is stopped
    rospy.spin()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    listener()
```
We now have two callbacks which are doing the same thing, to log on the terminal.

Since now we have changed the files, we need to re-instrument them.
```bash
$ cd ~/catkin_ws/src/beginner_tutorials/ROSMonitoring/instrumentation/
$ ./generator
{'path': '~/catkin_ws/src/rosmon/scripts/', 'topics': 'all'}
('chatter', ('String', 'from std_msgs.msg import String'), 'queue_size=10')
('count', ('Int32', 'from std_msgs.msg import Int32'), 'queue_size=10')
```
Since we have not selected any specific topics inside monitor.yaml, we automatically consider the new count topic among the topics to be monitored.

The specification given in test.rml is very trivial, but, it constrains the valid values for count.
```prolog
hello matches {topic:'chatter',data:'hello'};
count matches {topic:'count',data:val} with val > 100;

Main = (hello \/ count)*;
```
The first two lines refer to the kind of events our specification handles.
In particular, the second one has a constraint on the value observed for the topic count. Very naively, we are just saying that the count events are valid only if greater than 100.

If we now change the monitor.yaml configuration file in order to filter the wrong events (since we executed generator, we have to uncomment again the Online part).
```yaml
# monitor: # offline RV
#  log: ./log.txt # file where the monitor will log the observed events
#  when: offline # when the RV will be applied

monitor: # online RV
   action: filter # default action (optional) # the other possible value is: filter
   log: ./log.txt # file where the monitor will log the observed events
   oracle: # the oracle running and ready to check the specification
     port: 8080 # the port where it is listening
     url: 127.0.0.1 # the url where it is listening
   when: online # when the RV will be applied
```
In this way, we are saying to the monitor that we want to filter the wrong events.

Let us try again the Online verification (as before)!

We should now notice that the count events are not propagated to the listener node until they reach value 101.
```bash
...
[INFO] [1559638170.561132]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard hello
[INFO] [1559638170.894412]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard hello
[INFO] [1559638171.941144]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard hello
[INFO] [1559638172.040488]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard hello
[INFO] [1559638172.203479]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard 101
[INFO] [1559638172.608934]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard hello
[INFO] [1559638173.004578]: /listener_27375_1559638153394I heard 102
...
```
The Online monitor always generates the log file (as the Offline monitor). The big difference is that for each event saved inside the log file, we already add the information about the presence of an error or not (simply adding the 'error':True key-value into the traces).
